---
layout: post
title: Week Six in Review
tags:
  - weekly review
  - tdd
  - role empathy
  - cli
  - katas
---

This felt like a productive week, which was nice :smile: I could have done more work on my goals though! I also did a lot more writing of code, which was really nice :yum:

## Goals

#### Work through my backlog

My backlog is now _slightly_ smaller than it was at the start of the week, so I guess this one was somewhat successful? I definitely would have preferred to get through more cards though.

#### Do some pair programming or other work with a teammate

I did one kata with Mattias, so success! I have also arranged to do some with Pedro next week, and as a group we decided to assign random pairs to do one kata together each week, so I'll be doing that too.

#### Do more work in lower-level languages

I did some bash scripting which was a lot of fun :smile: I will hopefully be able to do more in the coming weeks.

#### Do more work on the payslips coding exercise

I finally got around to adding dependency injection (see below). I think I have done as much of this as I am going to, since while there's still a lot which could be improved, there's not much more that I can learn from it.

---

## Tasks

#### Ian Cooper's TDD talk (video)

This was a useful and interesting perspective on TDD. His main point was that when using TDD, you should test _behaviour_, not _implementation_. This means that new tests should be written when implementing a new requirement, not when implementing a new method. It also means that your tests should not break when refactoring (since refactoring does not change the API). If you need to write tests about the implementation (e.g. to help you write the initial code) then you **must** delete them as soon as possible, and certainly before your code goes into production. These tests are liable to break frequently, and no one wants to have to maintain them.  
This leads in to some reading I was doing about test doubles vs. mocks. What I read suggested that test doubles simply return known data, to allow the test to run. This lets you test the behaviour of the system more easily, since you know the input and can thus check the output against the expected output. Mocks on the other hand check implementation - e.g. how many times a certain method got called. Thus in general using test doubles is fine, but mocks should be avoided.  
Back on Ian Cooper's talk, he also discussed how to use the red-green-refactor method properly. Firstly, it is vital that you have a test which actually goes red, since otherwise you won't know if it's working because you've successfully implemented the given behaviour, or because it's just always passed. Secondly, making it go green is about writing bad code. It doesn't matter how terrible your code is at this point, just get it done as quickly as possible, no matter the shortcuts. This step is not so much about implementing the functionality as it is understanding how you _will_ implement it later. Then during refactoring you turn your awful code into clean code. During this step you remove duplication and code smells, implement patterns, etc. You should not write any new tests, and your existing tests should not need to be changed, since the public interface should not change and you should create any new public methods or classes. This final step should leave you with good code and a loosely coupled system.

#### Add dependency injection to coding exercise

This took me a lot less time than I expected it to, although I only did this for one class since it was about learning and not making a polished system. In general this exercise could still be improved, but I feel like I've learnt the majority of what I can from it, so it's not really worth doing much more with it at this point (after all the point of thing is for me to learn, not for anyone to actually use it). But I'm feeling pretty comfortable with dependency injection now, since it's quite a simple concept - just something uni neglected to mention.

#### Databases workshop

JC and Prateek covered the difference between synchronous and asynchronous databases, and the limitations of each. They also explained ACID and BASE databases (which I learnt at uni but had forgotten), and when each would be used. Finally, they linked it back to AWS and how databases are replicated across AZs to improve application stability.  

#### Role empathy: business analyst

Warren discussed his role as a BA and how he helps teams. He explained that it is a multidisciplinary role; different BAs have different backgrounds and specialties. In general they help to define and validate the problem domain, and focus on delivering value to stakeholders. They facilitate outcomes by making recommendations and presenting options, not by making the final decisions. 

#### Minesweeper kata (pair programming with Mattias)

This took us a while to get up and running, but it was a good exercise to practice my javascript. It was also good to do some more pair programming, especially with some whom I haven't worked with before. I think I need some more practice to really understand the javascript programming paradigm though, in order to be able to write properly idiomatic javascript. I think that understanding a new language at that level is more important than learning syntax, since syntax errors are much easier to catch and correct than fundamental structural errors. 

#### Bash scripting with Jonathan

It was very educational to see how bash scripts are used in production / dev ops, and I learnt a lot about how to effectively write, test and debug them. Since he was working with JSON, I also learnt a lot about that format and how to quickly manipulate it to get and store data. It was also a lot of fun, since I enjoy bash scripting. 

---

## Takeaways

* Test behaviour, not implementation
* Write bad to code to understand how you implement functionality, then refactor
* Make code well-structured and extensible
* Choose the right type of database for your task; there are always trade-offs
* BAs ask questions to validate approaches and uncover potential flaws, not because they don't like you :stuck_out_tongue:
* I need to continue to practice my javascript
* It is good to pair program with a variety of people, to see different approaches and ways of working
* Bash can be very powerful if used well
* Bash can be very readable if written well

---

## An Aside

Unsurprisingly, I am getting a lot better at using hotkeys, touch typing, using vim and git, etc. etc. just by needing to use those things every day. This is sort of what I expected, but I had forgotten that I had barely touched a keyboard (except for gaming) for several months before starting here, so apparently I was a lot rustier than I realised :laughing:

---

## Next Week's Goals

* Remember how to write C  
* Finish the blog posts in my backlog  
* Get Docker working  
* Figure out my roadmap for the next few weeks with my mentors
