---
layout: post
title: Week Ten in Review
tags:
  - weekly review
---

This week I have made progress on my kata, and have started planning for the next project!

## Goals

#### Document some of my learnings better (e.g. write a topical blog post, or make a cheat sheet)

I still haven't done this :sob: So it's being passed to next week *again* :persevere:

#### Get the team t-shirts off to the printers! (I have been working with Mel on this)

Done! :yum: The t-shirts have been ordered, so hopefully we can all look coordinated in our team logo soon :stuck_out_tongue:

#### Finish the Tic Tac Toe kata

I haven't finished this (and I'm not sure I'll end up getting through all the extensions anyway), but I have made progress which is good :smile:

---

## Tasks

#### Tic tac toe kata

I made progress with adding some of the advanced functionality to my tic tac toe kata. I got it working with a 3D board, and started adding in some of the changes under _more user friendly_. Neither of these required too much effort (or at least, very few changes outside of new implementations of interfaces and allowing for additional user input), so I think my implementation is well on the way to being properly loosely coupled. The advice I've received from my mentors and Jon has definitely helped get me to this point! I will hopefully finish adding the _more user friendly_ changes next week.

#### Group project planning

It has been decided that myself and two others will move on to the meaningful project :grinning: I'm excited about working on something that will actually get used, and I think the group will work well together.  
We started planning towards the end of this week. We discussed amongst ourselves what we want to learn from the project, and put out a call for project suggestions. Next week will be a lot of meetings to gather information on proposals, and then hopefully by the end of the week we will have decided on one :hushed:

#### Cloud formation workshop

I missed the original workshop due to helping with interviews, so JC kindly took me through the content one-on-one. He's a good teacher, so I think I understand the concepts well. It's something that I think I'll just need more practice at to remember all the commands etc. easily though.

#### Company mission briefing

It was interesting to get an overview of what's been happening in the company and how things are going.

#### _Clean Code_ book chapters 7, 8 and 9

Chapter 7 discussed how exceptions are preferable to returning error codes, since they allow more flexibility for when and how they are handled. It also talked about the importance of ensuring that your exceptions provide enough context, without having too many different types (which must be handled separately). It suggested encapsulating exceptional, but correct behaviour in special case objects rather than using exceptions, and why to avoid nulls where possible.  
Chapter 8 discussed the use of boundaries, in particular between your system and 3rd party code. It recommended wrapping calls to 3rd party APIs (or even built-in, which may change) in your own class, so that if or when these change you only need to modify that single adapter class. This also makes testing easier, since you can easily create a test double for the adapter class which does not use the 3rd party code. Finally, it suggested testing the 3rd party API in much the same way you would your own code. This allows you to learn the new API, but later will also assist in verifying that a new version of the API is compatible with your application (or what you need to change).  
Chapter 9 advocated that tests need to be maintained as well as the rest of your code. However, since efficiency is less of a concern, you should prioritise readability over efficiency (within reason, since your tests still need to run fast enough to be usable in a pipeline etc). It suggested writing functions within the test code on top your API when tests need to do extensive setup or other repeated calls, to make them more readable (e.g. makePages(1,2,3,4,5) to replace book.addPage(1, whitePaper); book.addPage(2, whitePaper); etc). Each test should deal with only one concept, and minimise the number of asserts needed to test that concept. Finally, it discussed the need for tests to be F.I.R.S.T (fast, independent, repeatable, self-validating, and timely).  
When I looked at my tests for the tic tac toe kata, I felt that I had done fairly well with the recommendations for testing discussed above, except for the repeated calls during setup. I therefore went through and made changes based on the suggestions in _Clean Code_. I think that this was a good exercise, and definitely demonstrated how it can improved readability. 

#### Natas ctf exercise

Natas is a web-based capture the flag exercise, which goes through some common website vulnerabilities. It's been really interesting, and I think will be good things to keep in mind when I'm working on production code.

---

## Takeaways

* It's good to actually put into practice the things I'm learning from the _Clean Code_ book.  
* My design has definitely improved thanks to the code reviews.  
* There's a lot of ways users can break your site! :scream:

---

## Next Week's Goals

* Document some of my learnings better (e.g. write a topical blog post, or make a cheat sheet)
* Finish gathering proposals for the meaningful project and decide on one!
