---
layout: post
title: Week Nine in Review
---

I spent a lot of time writing code etc this week :sunglasses: So although I didn't do many different tasks, I still got a lot done! It's nice to be able to spend a decent chunk of time coding.

## Goals

#### Do more of the Over The Wire exercises - and use the shell tricks I learnt in the zsh workshop :star2:

I did more of the capture-the-flag exercises; I finished Leviathan and got about a third of the way through Natas. I didn't do too well on using shell shortcuts though, not helped by the fact that Natas is web-based! I did learn a lot about basic website security though, which I think will be very good knowledge to have.

#### Use the design learnings I got out of the Game of Life kata

This goal I definitely achieved. The Game of Life and Tic Tac Toe katas are very similar, so it was quite easy to apply the design feedback I got from one to the other.

#### Document some of my learnings better (e.g. write a topical blog post, or make a cheat sheet)

I didn't do this at all :sob: So it's time to try again next week! In particular I think a CLI cheat-sheet would be useful.

---

## Tasks

#### Refactor Game of Life kata

I went through and implemented a lot of Jon's feedback, which involved a lot of changes (since his feedback was centred around design). I didn't change everything though, since for some of it I pretty much had to re-write the whole thing. Since the tic tac toe kata is so similar, I decided to just use those design suggestions for that kata rather than re-doing the Game of Life.

#### Tic Tac Toe kata

I finished the basic version of this and have started implementing some of the advanced changes. I think my design is much better than my initial Game of Life attempt, since I used all the suggestions Jon made. So far I've extended it to take any size board, allowed players to pick their markers, and have started implementing a 3D board. Once the 3D board is working I'll finish up the rest of the "more user friendly" changes.

#### Cake Thief kata with Ryan

This kata was reasonably simple, and Ryan and I work well together so we got it done quite quickly :smile:. It was effectively a variation of the knapsack problem, which we'd both done before, but the main point of doing it was to get some more experience pairing, so we accomplished that goal well :satisfied:

#### Pictures of me presentation

We've been taking turns presenting about ourselves in order to get to know each other and the New Zealand grads better, and this week was my turn. It was not my best presentation (probably because I didn't practice or write notes :sweat_smile:) but I think it was ok. It's been interesting learning about everyone else in other weeks!

#### Capture the flag exercises

These have been fun! I feel like I've learnt a lot from them.

---

## Takeaways

* Code reviews are definitely worth it! And it's good to get feedback from a couple of different people as well.  
* It's good to get experience pairing with a range of people, but it's always easier when the person you're pairing with has a similar thought process to you.  
* It's fun to push the boundaries of your design by adding in additional features.  
* I really enjoy capture the flag, and learning about security in general :innocent:

---

## Next Week's Goals

* Document some of my learnings better (e.g. write a topical blog post, or make a cheat sheet)
* Get the team t-shirts off to the printers! (I have been working with Mel on this)
* Finish the Tic Tac Toe kata
