---
layout: post
title: Week Five in Review
tags:
  - weekly review
  - git
  - vim
  - cli
  - books
  - networking
---

This week I spent a lot of time reading, doing workshops, and especially writing blog posts. On the coding front I was mostly working with various command line tools - git, vim, and bash in general. I should get back to doing some Java or Javascript though; it's been a while since I've worked with those sorts of languages.

## Goals

####  Write at least one blog post in addition to my weekly one  

Done, twice over in fact :innocent: I wrote one on [public-key encryption]({{site.url}}{% post_url 2018-03-14-public-key-encryption %}) and one on [using git from the command line]({{site.url}}{% post_url 2018-03-16-git-commandline %}).

#### Practice git and vim commands

Also done :star2: I set up a test repo and had a play with all of the git commands I used to use regularly, and made notes as I went. This was a really good exercise to get myself back up to speed with things I haven't done in a while, or used to use a GUI for.  
As for vim, I used it both to make edits in my test repo, and to write my blog posts. I found that for the most part it's actually easier to use than the GitHub GUI for writing posts, since it has syntax highlighting. I'm definitely feeling a lot more comfortable with vim now.

####  Do more work in lower-level languages

I completed the Bandit levels (see below), and worked on the command line a lot with git and vim, but didn't really do anything else towards this goal :broken_heart:  I will try to work on it more next week.

---

## Tasks

#### Careers fair

On Tuesday I attended a university careers fair as a representative for MYOB. It was an interesting experience being on the other side of the event, since I had previously only attended careers fairs as a student. I had a lot of fun talking to students about our graduate program, and what I've been doing in it.

#### OverTheWire Bandit

I really, really enjoyed this basic capture-the-flag exercise and learnt a **lot**. It's been a long time since I did some work with the command line, but it was great to refresh those skills and learn some new tricks. Some of the later levels were reasonably difficult and/or fiddly, but I managed to finish them all :satisfied: I'm really hoping I have the chance to do another of the wargames (they have a lot more, but Bandit was the beginner one so I'm expecting the others to be very challenging!).

#### _Clean Code_ book: chapter two

I didn't end up attending the book club this week, due to the careers fair. However from what those that did make it said, I didn't miss much since it was just an introductory session. We're expected to read chapters one and two by next week.  
Chapter two discussed choosing names. The core of this was to make them as clear, intention-revealing and easy to use as possible. It also talked about avoiding encoding (including the implementation type in names), being consistent in name conventions, and giving context via classes etc in preference to prefixes. In short, your names should help make your code as easy to read, work with and refactor as possible.

#### Networking advanced workshop

This workshop mostly focused on the basics of AWS. It was good to have an actual explaination of AWS; I've worked with it a little before, but only from the command line and I've never had it actually explained to me. The concepts were fairly simple (and/or related to ones I've learnt before), but it was really good to have it all put together and explained. JC is also a very good teacher, which helped a lot.

#### Git

I discussed this a little above as well, but I'm glad I took some time to play around with git commands in a repo which simply didn't matter. I've had two of the other proteges ask me questions about git in the last week, so I thought it was important to make my own notes available to them. I had previously made note of a lot of useful commands, but I hadn't played around with them enough to be confident with them, and my notes were badly organised and quite messy. It was a good exercise to write them up neatly in both a blog post and a typed cheat-sheet. I know that these will be useful to me, and I hope that they help others as well.

#### Blog posts

I found writing blog posts a good medium to record what I've learnt, especially for things which can't be practiced per se (e.g. cryptography concepts). I learn very well from lecture-style talks, but I also find that writing up my notes helps me to organise my thoughts better and remember what I've learnt.  
I'm also getting a lot better with Markdown, which is nice to see. This week I learnt how to add dynamic links to my posts (using site.url and post_url) and insert images. I'm also remembering the double-space-for-return thing better :sweat_smile:

---

## Takeaways

* Practice and play around with things, then write it up!  
* Cheat sheets are great and I should make more :satisfied:  
* MOAR bash! :astonished: :stuck_out_tongue_closed_eyes:

---

## Next Week's Goals

* Do more work in lower-level languages  
* Work through my backlog (it's getting a bit out of hand... Too many things I want to do, too little time! :persevere:)  
* Do some pair programming or other work with a teammate (it's been a while, although I disucss things and ask / answer questions often)
* Do more work on the payslips coding exercise (it's been sitting in "doing" for far too long!)
